Text-Generation-Inference introducing Multi-Backend (#2580)
huggingface/blog: tgi-multi-backend.md

---

> title: "Text-Generation-Inference empowering all the AI Builders Community" 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Introducing TGI Backends: one for all, all for one" 
```

thumbnail: TODO
authors:
- user: mfuntowicz
- user: hlarcher
---

> # Text-Generation-Inference empowering all the AI Builders Community
> 
> ## Introducing multi-backends support for TGI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Introducing TGI Backends: one for all, all for one
```

## Introduction

> Since its inception in 2022, text-generation-inference (TGI) has provided Hugging Face and the AI Community with a performance-focused tool to easily deploy large-language models (LLMs). TGI initially offered an almost no-code solution to load models from the Hugging Face Hub and deploy them in production on NVIDIA GPUs. Over time, support expanded to include AMD Instinct, Intel GPUs, AWS Trainium/Inferentia, Google TPU, and Intel Gaudi.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since its initial release in 2022, Text-Generation-Inference (TGI) has provided Hugging Face and the AI Community with a performance-focused solution to easily deploy large-language models (LLMs). TGI initially offered an almost no-code solution to load models from the Hugging Face Hub and deploy them in production on NVIDIA GPUs. Over time, support expanded to include AMD Instinct GPUs, Intel GPUs, AWS Trainium/Inferentia, Google TPU, and Intel Gaudi.  
```

> Over the years, multiple inferencing solutions have emerged, including vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, TensorRT-LLM, etc., splitting up the overall ecosystem. Different models, hardware, and scenarios often require distinct backends to achieve optimal performance. However, configuring these backends correctly, managing licenses, and integrating them into existing infrastructure can be challenging for users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the years, multiple inferencing solutions have emerged, including vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, TensorRT-LLM, etc., splitting up the overall ecosystem. Different models, hardware, and use cases may work best or require a specific backend to achieve optimal performance. However, configuring each backend correctly, managing licenses, and integrating them into existing infrastructure can be challenging for users.
```

> To address this, we are excited to introduce the concept of TGI backends. This new feature gives the flexibility to integrate with any of the solutions above through a single unified frontend layer: TGI. This change makes it easier for the community to get the best performance for their production workloads, switching backends according to their modeling, hardware, and performance requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this, we are excited to introduce the concept of TGI backends. This new architecture gives the flexibility to integrate with any of the solutions above through TGI as a single unified frontend layer. This change makes it easier for the community to get the best performance for their production workloads, switching backends according to their modeling, hardware, and performance requirements.
```

> To address this, we are excited to introduce the concept of TGI backends. This new feature gives the flexibility to integrate with any of the solutions above through a single unified frontend layer: TGI. This change makes it easier for the community to get the best performance for their production workloads, switching backends according to their modeling, hardware, and performance requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address this, we are excited to introduce the concept of TGI backends. This new feature gives the flexibility to integrate with any of the solutions above through a single unified frontend layer: TGI. This change makes it easier for the community to get the best performance for their production workloads, switching backends according to their modeling, hardware, and performance requirements. 

The Hugging Face team is excited to contribute to and collaborate with the teams that build vLLM, llama.cpp, TensorRT-LLM, and the teams at AWS, Google, NVIDIA, AMD and Intel to offer a robust and consistent user experience for TGI users whichever backend and hardware they want to use.
```

![TGI multi-backend stack](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/tgi-multi-backend/tgi-multi-backend-stack.png)

## TGI Backend: under the hood

TGI is made of multiple components, primarily written in Rust and Python. Rust powers the HTTP and scheduling layers, and Python remains the go-to for modeling.

> Long story short: Rust allows us to improve the overall robustness of the serving layer with static analysis and compiler-based memory safety enforcement: it brings the ability to scale to multiple cores with the same safety guarantees more easily. Leveraging Rust’s strong type system for the HTTP layer and scheduler makes it possible to avoid memory issues while maximizing the concurrency, bypassing Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in Python-based environments. 

Reviewer 2: "...bypassing Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in..."
--> "...bypassing **_the_** Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in ..."

Reviewer 3: "the" is not actually needed here in this case because it is not referring to a definite article due to the use of "in Python-based environments"

Reviewer 2: Ah okay, I thought the definite article would still commonly be used when talking about specific entities, like "the Mona Lisa in Paris", "The Global Interpreter Lock in Python" etc 👍

	Speaking about Rust… Surprise, that's the TGI starting point to integrate a new backend \- 🤗

Earlier this year, the TGI team worked on exposing the foundational knobs to disentangle how the actual HTTP server and the scheduler were coupled together. 
This work introduced the new Rust  `trait Backend`, to interface existing, original inference solution and the one to come.

Having the new `Backend` interface (or trait in Rusty terms) paves the way for modularity and makes it possible to actually route the incoming requests towards different modeling and execution engines.

## Looking into 2025

> Things are constantly in motion here at Hugging Face, and TGI is no exception. As we look ahead to 2025 we are excited to share some of the upcoming developments for TGI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new multi-backend capabilities of TGI open up many impactful roadmap opportunities. As we look ahead to 2025 we are excited to share some of the TGI developments we are most excited about:
```

* **NVIDIA TensorRT-LLM backend**: We are collaborating with the NVIDIA TensorRT-LLM team to bring all the astonishing NVIDIA GPUs \+ TensorRT performances to the community. This work will be covered more extensively in an upcoming blog post. It closely relates to our mission to empower AI builders with the open-source availability of both `optimum-nvidia` quantize/build/evaluate TensorRT compatible artifacts alongside TGI+TRTLLM to easily deploy, execute, and scale deployments.
* **Llama.cpp backend**: we are collaborating with the llama.cpp team to extend the support for server production use cases. The llama.cpp backend for TGI will provide a strong CPU-based option for anyone willing to deploy on Intel, AMD, or ARM CPU servers.

> * **vLLM backend**: we have been contributing to the vLLM project and are looking to integrate vLLM as a TGI backend in Q1 '25.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **vLLM backend**: we have been contributing to the vLLM project and are looking to integrate vLLM as a TGI backend in Q1 '25.
* **Neuron backend**: we are working with the Neuron teams at AWS to enable Inferentia 2 and Trainium 2 support natively in TGI
```

Reviewer: @dacorvo does that sound good for you?

Reviewer 4: I think we can also mention a Google TPU backend, something like:
```markdown
* **TPU Backend**: we are working to integrate with the Jetstream teams to provide the best performance and enable it as a TGI backend.
```

> We are convinced that backends will help simplify the deployments of LLMs, bringing versatility and performance to all TGI users.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are convinced that TGI backends will help simplify the deployments of LLMs, bringing versatility and performance to all TGI users.  
```

> Our vision is to establish TGI as the reference solution powering our *Inference Endpoints* product. With the addition of new backends, users will be able to deploy managed inference models across a wide range of cloud providers and hardware platforms ensuring top-tier performance and reliability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will soon be able to benefit from it directly within [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints/), our managed deployment service, as we integrate TGI Backends into the product. As we add support for new TGI Backends, customers will be able to easily deploy models on various hardware with top-tier performance and reliability out of the box.
```

---
title: "Text-Generation-Inference empowering all the AI Builders Community" 
thumbnail: TODO
authors:
- user: mfuntowicz
- user: hlarcher
---

# Text-Generation-Inference empowering all the AI Builders Community

## Introducing multi-backends support for TGI

## Introduction

Since its initial release in 2022, Text-Generation-Inference (TGI) has provided Hugging Face and the AI Community with a performance-focused solution to easily deploy large-language models (LLMs). TGI initially offered an almost no-code solution to load models from the Hugging Face Hub and deploy them in production on NVIDIA GPUs. Over time, support expanded to include AMD Instinct GPUs, Intel GPUs, AWS Trainium/Inferentia, Google TPU, and Intel Gaudi.  

> Over the years, multiple inferencing solutions have emerged, including vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, TensorRT-LLM, etc., splitting up the overall ecosystem. Different models, hardware, and use cases may work best or require a specific backend to achieve optimal performance. However, configuring each backend correctly, managing licenses, and integrating them into existing infrastructure can be challenging for users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Over the years, multiple inferencing solutions have emerged, including vLLM, SGLang, llama.cpp, TensorRT-LLM, etc., splitting up the overall ecosystem. Different models, hardware, and use cases may require a specific backend to achieve optimal performance. However, configuring each backend correctly, managing licenses, and integrating them into existing infrastructure can be challenging for users.
```

To address this, we are excited to introduce the concept of TGI backends. This new feature gives the flexibility to integrate with any of the solutions above through a single unified frontend layer: TGI. This change makes it easier for the community to get the best performance for their production workloads, switching backends according to their modeling, hardware, and performance requirements.

![][image1]

## TGI Backend: under the hood

> 	TGI is made of multiple components, primarily written in Rust and  Python. Rust powers the HTTP and scheduling layers, and Python remains the go-to for the modeling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	TGI is made of multiple components, primarily written in Rust and Python. Rust powers the HTTP and scheduling layers, and Python remains the go-to for modeling.
```

> Leveraging Rust’s strong type system for the HTTP layer and the scheduler makes it possible to avoid memory issues while maximizing the concurrency, bypassing Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in Python-based environments. Long story short: Rust allowed us to improve the overall robustness of the serving layer with static analysis, compiler-based memory safety enforcement, along with the ability to scale more easily to multiple cores with the same safety guarantee.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Long story short: Rust allows us to improve the overall robustness of the serving layer with static analysis, compiler-based memory safety enforcement, alongside the ability to scale to multiple cores with the same safety guarantee more easily. Leveraging Rust’s strong type system for the HTTP layer and scheduler makes it possible to avoid memory issues while maximizing the concurrency, bypassing Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in Python-based environments. 
```

	Speaking about Rust… Surprise, that's the TGI starting point to integrate a new backend \- 🤗

Earlier this year, the TGI team worked on exposing the foundational knobs to disentangle how the actual HTTP server and the scheduler were coupled together. 

> This work introduced the new Rust  `trait Backend`, to interface existing, original inference solution and the one to come.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This work introduced the new Rust `trait Backend` to interface existing, original inference solution and the one to come.
```

> Having the new `Backend` interface (or trait in Rusty terms) paves the way for modularity and makes it possible to actually route the incoming requests towards different modeling and execution engines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Having this new `Backend` interface (or trait in Rusty terms) paves the way for modularity and makes it possible to actually route the incoming requests towards different modeling and execution engines.
```

> ## Looking into 2025

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Looking forward: 2025
```

Reviewer 3: or maybe What's next in 2025

The new multi-backend capabilities of TGI open up many impactful roadmap opportunities. As we look ahead to 2025 we are excited to share some of the TGI developments we are most excited about:

* **NVIDIA TensorRT-LLM backend**: We are collaborating with the NVIDIA TensorRT-LLM team to bring all the optimized NVIDIA GPUs \+ TensorRT performances to the community. This work will be covered more extensively in an upcoming blog post. It closely relates to our mission to empower AI builders with the open-source availability of both `optimum-nvidia` quantize/build/evaluate TensorRT compatible artifacts alongside TGI+TRTLLM to easily deploy, execute, and scale deployments on NVIDIA GPUs.

> * **Llama.cpp backend**: we are collaborating with the llama.cpp team to extend the support for server production use cases. The llama.cpp backend for TGI will provide a strong CPU-based option for anyone willing to deploy on Intel, AMD, or ARM CPU servers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Llama.cpp backend**: We are collaborating with the llama.cpp team to extend the support for server production use cases. The llama.cpp backend for TGI will provide a strong CPU-based option for anyone willing to deploy on Intel, AMD, or ARM CPU servers.
```

> * **vLLM backend**: we have been contributing to the vLLM project and are looking to integrate vLLM as a TGI backend in Q1 '25.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **vLLM backend**: We are contributing to the vLLM project and are looking to integrate vLLM as a TGI backend in Q1 '25.
```

> * **Neuron backend**: we are working with the Neuron teams at AWS to enable Inferentia 2 and Trainium 2 support natively in TGI

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Neuron backend**: We are working with AWS Neuron teams to enable Inferentia 2 and Trainium 2 support natively in TGI.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: could we add the bit about TPUs?
```markdown
* **TPU Backend**: We are working with the Jetstream teams to provide the best performance and enable it as a TGI backend.
```

Author: Done ✅

> We are convinced that TGI backends will help simplify the deployments of LLMs, bringing versatility and performance to all TGI users.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are confident TGI Backends will help simplify the deployments of LLMs, bringing versatility and performance to all TGI users.
```

> You will soon be able to benefit from it directly within [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints/), our managed deployment service, as we integrate TGI Backends into the product. As we add support for new TGI Backends, customers will be able to easily deploy models on various hardware with top-tier performance and reliability out of the box.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You'll soon be able to use TGI Backends directly within [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints/). Customers will be able to easily deploy models with TGI Backends on various hardware with top-tier performance and reliability out of the box.
```

> Stay tuned for the next blog posts to dig into technical details and performance benchmarks of upcoming backends\!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stay tuned for the next blog post where we'll dig into technical details and performance benchmarks of upcoming backends\!
```
